In this lecture, you'll learn how to perform network automation using Ansible with a lab demo.
I've already got my lab environment set up and I've got three writers.
There are one hour to an hour, three.
And right now I've got no configuration on the towers other than I've configured them with an IP address
for management.
And I've also enabled S.H. on there.
So the Ansible will be able to connect and push the configuration.
The configuration that I'm going to do is I'm going to add a new interface to each other with an IP
address.
I'll also configure them with their A.P. server and I'm going to enable logging Synchronoss on the SS
H lines.
So I just verify the current configuration on the right first.
So I'll go to our one.
I'll do a show IP interface brief and you can see it's just got its management IP address one seven
two twenty three one one two one are two.
Is it one or two and are three is one or three.
And if I do a should run and include A.P., you can see that Antep server has not been configured and
I'll do a sure run and then scroll down the bottom and you can see on my UI lines for each axis that
I do not have logging synchronous configured on there.
OK, so let's now go on to the ansible machine and get this set up.
So I've already got Ansible installed on Linux Virtual Machine, which is running ST or S and let's
check the Ansible is running OK on here.
Actually first off, I'll just change to my ansible directory, but I've already got set up on here
and then I'm going to see Ansible localhost for this local machine and I'm calling the module ping that
is going to ping itself with Ansible.
I can see I've got green success there.
So Ansible is working just fine on my machine here, OK.
Next thing is that I want to check my inventory that I've got our one hour to and our three did there.
Before I look at the ansible directory, let's just check there added to my hosts file here on this
Linux machine because I want to be able to connect to them by their hostname as well as their IP address.
So I will see Schiro to elevate my privileges and then cut through the file.
And it's easy.
She hosts and then I.
Enter my password and I can see that I do have entries for our one hour, two and three with our management
IP addresses.
OK, next, let's check the ansible inventory.
So for that, I'm going to do Sudoku again and the inventory is in ANSI Swash Ansible slash hosts.
And here is my inventory for Ansible.
So you can see here that you can configure groups in the inventory.
So I just walk through what I've got configured here.
So up at the top I've added each of my hosts are one, are two and are three.
And I'm just a comment in there.
That's why it's got the hash at the front to see that those are individual hosts.
Then I've also got groups configured as well.
So our one and our two are thirty seven, forty five years.
So I've created a group called thirty seven.
Forty five hour three is a seventy two hundred.
So I've got a group called seventy two hundred and ten of also created a group called Rotor's All which
contains the other groups of thirty seven, forty five and seventy two hundred.
So the reason I've got my inventory configured like this means that if I want to push some changes just
to our one, then in my playbook I can reference our one.
If I wanted to push changes to all of my thirty seven forty five hours then I can specify the thirty
seven forty five writers group and if I want to apply changes to all of my drivers, then I apply that
to the all group in my playbook.
And that's what I'm going to be doing in the example here.
So you can see here that when you are using Ansible for network automation, you could have different
groups for your viewers, for your switches, for your firewalls, etc..
Also, different groups may be based on the location of those devices, and that means that it's very
easy a target where you want to change the configuration to.
OK, so my inventory is all looking good.
Next up, what she what files I've got in my ansible directory here inside my home directory and I've
got my URL config Yamal.
That is my playbook that I'm going to be using.
And I've also got a host vars directly.
What was Hoopsters directory is used for.
If you want to specify variables for your individual host, you can also specify variables based on
the groups as well.
So if I wanted to configure variables which are common to all of my seven hundred drivers, I could
have had that for that there.
So let's see what is in Hocevar.
So I'll do an Atlas post vars and you can see that I've got a variable file for our one hour too.
And our three, they are written in YAML, so let's see what is in there.
So I'll do I can't host VARs and ah one y email and then here you can see so you can see that this is
a yaml file.
So because of that it starts with my three dashes and then I'm seeing the ansible connection is coming
from this local machine and then I've specified my login credentials to the username is flat box and
the password is flat box.
I've added a matching username and password on my routers.
Obviously real world.
You're going to want to use a better password than that.
And then I've also specified the Lookback address as well because I'm going to be creating a new lookback
interface on the voters with an IP address.
Obviously, the three drivers need to have a different IP address.
So looking here, this is the one and this is the IP address.
It's going to get on its back.
And if we have a look at our two.
You can see the handle handle one or two are one was one or one, and our three is going to be one or
three.
OK, so I've got Ansible set up on this machine.
I have got my variables set up for my different hosts if I can log in them.
And I've also specified the IP address is going to be used on back there as well.
OK, next thing to do is let's check the icon connect then to the host via SFH, to management, to
the command for that is I'll do an ansible dash.
The module is paying and all in the inventory.
This is a default wild card where you see all it's going to ping everything in the inventory.
Now when I do this because I've got my credentials in those variable files, I need to do this from
the same directory that was arranged that I'm doing it from my ansible directory where I've got those
variable files.
Service should hopefully work, so I will hit enter.
And what it's doing here is it doesn't just hang them.
They actually check that it can log into them as well.
And I've got all success for all three of them, so that all looks good.
So everything's set up and I should be able to actually use my playbook to push some configuration to
those devices.
So let's have a look and see what kind of things that we can do with Ansible.
And Ansible does have a load of network modules already built into it.
Just makes your life really easy.
So let's have a look and see what is available by doing a Google search for it.
So you can see I've already set this up ahead of time.
I've Googled for Ansible network modules and I'm going to look at the first hit there and you can see
that these are all the built in modules and Ansible.
So there's loads of them here.
If I was to control F and I'll look for Aiwass and then looking at Aiwass, you can see these are all
the different modules that are built in for working with iOS writers so we can manage our layer to our
layer three interfaces, BGP, et cetera.
Also with the iOS config in iOS command module, you can send any commands that you want to in iOS,
but it's also modules for an actual ashlawn.
Cisco, there's also going to be iOS six are, etc. So loads of built in tasks in here, which makes
it really easy to use Ansible for network automation.
OK, and all of these modules actually run as Python scripts, so let's just check that.
So I'll go back onto my ansible machine again and I'm just going to copy this command from my other
window here, because this is the directory that was Python Scriptura.
And so I've looked for Ansible Modules Network and have a hit enter.
You see, that ties up with all of the different sections of modules that were available.
When I Googled for this, you can Seaver's modules for as I said earlier, iOS iOS six are anextra,
was also Juneau's, etc. Other vendors in here as well.
And let's look at the modules for Ayash.
So iOS in the and there.
And you can see again, those are the modules that we just had to look at and Google.
And you can see that by extension, these are actually pre-built Python script in Ansible for managing
your IOW routers.
Okay, so next, we're ready to actually push the configuration to the writers with the Ansible playbook.
So let's have a look at what I've got written in there.
So I'll do a cut there or config YAML.
So this is the plague that I've written already.
Let's have a walk through what I'm doing here.
So it's a YAML file, so it starts with three dashes and then I've given it the names and I'm going
to be doing my regular config here.
I'm applying it to Reuters all.
So that was the group that you saw in the inventory.
The config is going to be pushed to all of my writers.
Gobber Fox knew by default when Ansible connects to the device, start the playbook.
It will gather some facts about to save some time.
Here I am turning that off and then I've got my tasks.
The first one I've named the A.P. server and the module is Iooss A.P. and I'm going to configure an
A.P. server of to one of my drivers and that is going to be present.
OK, so if you just came this completely new, you used Ansible before and you know that you want to
set Antep server on your drivers, how do you find out how you would do that?
Well, you check the documentation, so I will go back to Google again.
Let me just scroll through here to you that if I can find it, OK, there we go.
So I would look at the network more.
I would look in the IOM section and there is actually one called I was A.P. so I can be pretty sure
about the one it used for saying the A.P. server and the name of the module is IOPS underscore A.P.
So I do a Google search for that.
And then that brings me this page here, which is the documentation for that module.
So you can see all of the different parameters that available here.
And a bit further down, it gives me some examples.
So that was how I found out how it was set up using Ansible.
Very simple.
So I have got that in my playbook.
Other things I wanted to do was to configure logging synchronous on SSA sessions.
Now, there's not a module which is dedicated specifically to this, but if I want to do any command,
I can use the IOC config module.
So that's what I what I'm using here.
And then I'm seeing the line.
I'm going to add the config, I'm going to add is logging Synchronoss and where I'm going to advertise
underlying the UI 015.
Then I'm also going to create a box zero interface using the Iooss interface module.
And the name of the interface is going to be Lookback zero.
So that's how you create the interface.
I need to use a different model to the actual IP address on it.
So there I'm using the module YOSSELE three interface.
I'm going to configure my lookback interface and because I need to have a different lookback address
on my three different routers, I'm referring to the variable of Lookback zero address.
If you remember when we looked in the host varas file, I had a variable in there called Back Zero Address
and then I'm calling it from here in my playbook.
Then the last thing I'm going to do is I'm going to see if the configuration if modified.
So that's using the iOS config module and I'm going to save when Ansible running this playbook has made
some actual changes to the writers.
OK, so that is everything that I'm going to be doing there.
So now what's actually running the playbook to the command provider is Ansible.
If I can spell it right, dyche playbook.
And then the name of my file was right here, config YAML, I'll hit Enter and it's going to start running
through the playbook because your first task is Antep server.
It's going to be pushing the A.P. configuration to my rotors.
And I can see it's changed our one hour to an hour.
Three civil looks good.
I've also set the logging Synchronoss on my SFH lines.
I've created my Luvox.
I'm now adding the IP address to the loop box and finally I'm going to see the config.
So that's been done.
An R one and R two.
It's just trying on our three right now, OK, and timed out on our three so I could try that again.
These things can happen and I'll have demonstration.
You can see that the whole works just fine apart from ar3.
OK, so looking down at the bottom you can see I've got green for our one and our two and you can see
that it's changed five things.
We're on our three.
It's red because it looks like it's mine to change the configuration, but it just failed to actually
save it.
OK, so let's go back and check this now.
So I'll go into our one.
I'll do a show IP interface brief and you can see there is my loop back with DOT one or one.
I'll do the same on R to show IP interface brief and there is back with its IP address configured on
there.
I know what's being done successfully on our three as well.
And if I do a show run and include and keep.
There's the A.P. server configured and everyone was logging Synchronoss so much to assure John for that.
And I'll scroll down to the bottom and you can see that logging Synchronoss has been applied to my UI
lines.
OK, so all good.
So Ansible was able to push the config successfully.
Let's see.
Something else happens with Ansible as well now.
So I'll just go back.
I'm just going to run the playbook again just to show you the idea of Ansible being a dependent.
It's quite hard to say.
And what it means is that when it goes to push configuration, if it sees the configuration already
there, then it's not going to do it again.
So it's not going to overwrite.
First off, it checks is just already there.
If it is, then I don't need to make any changes.
Now, when you do command line with the ansible module, that will actually overwrite but the A.P. server
and everything else in there, it's going to be unchanged.
So I can see there was only one change on each year when I ran the playbook this time.
But when I ran the playbook the first time, it made the full five changes.
OK, so it can see everything in here was OK.
Again, still having a problem with our free for some reason it's a different type of driver.
I could troubleshoot that later, but all I really needed to show you here to show you Ansible in action
during our network automation.
See you in the next Licia.